Konstantin Bazhenov is one of the first
of Jehovah’s Witnesses
in Russia to serve out a prison sentence
since the Supreme Court banned
the organization’s activity in 2017.
He was released from a prison colony
on May 5, 2021.
Upon release, he was immediately transferred
to a deportation holding center
and then deported to Ukraine.
He was deported
because Russia had annulled his
citizenship as a consequence
of his criminal prosecution.
Criminal charges were first initiated
against Konstantin
after Russian officers raided seven homes
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
including his, on June 12, 2018.
After that, he was charged with extremism.
Eventually, Konstantin and five of his
fellow worshippers were sent
to a pretrial detention center.
The FSB, the investigator,
and other operatives
promised me that if I pleaded guilty
and began cooperating with them,
they would guarantee me a suspended sentence
and I would not go to prison.
Konstantin refused to cooperate
with the authorities,
which would have meant
compromising his faith.
In total, Konstantin spent almost a year
in pretrial detention followed
by several months of restrictions
of certain activities
while awaiting the court sentence.
He was accused of organizing the activity
of an extremist organization.
The main accusation was based on the fact
that we held a religious meeting
in the winter, in January 2018.
People there read the Bible,
sang spiritual songs,
discussed how to live by Bible principles.
The investigator interpreted
this religious meeting
as a meeting of a legal entity
that was banned in Russia.
On September 19, 2019,
the judge announced the verdict:
three and a half years
in a general regime prison colony.
Three months later, the Court of Appeal
upheld the sentence,
and on February 4, 2020,
Konstantin was sent to the prison colony.
On February 8, 2020, I was taken
to the colony, to Correctional Colony 3,
in the city of Dimitrovgrad,
Ulyanovsk Region.
I worked in the colony store.
I received a lot of letters in prison.
An officer summoned me
and said to me: “Bazhenov,
“we receive 300 letters
for the whole colony in a year,
“but you alone have received
over 300 letters in a month!
“Who do you think you are?
Do you want our inspector
to drown in these letters?”
Well, I explained that people want
to support me, encourage me,
and comfort me in some way.
Konstantin spent a year and three months
in a prison colony
and was granted early conditional release
on May 5, 2021.
It was a happy moment.
I saw Irina, my wife, and we hugged.
The head of the prison division said:
“Kostya, I didn’t expect so many people!
“I knew you had brothers and sisters
“and that letters were being written to you.
But it still amazes me that so many people
would come to meet you.”
He concluded, “You must be a happy person!”
When the day arrived for him to be deported,
Konstantin received further support
from his fellow believers.
On the 19th of May, we arrived at the border.
They checked my documents
and issued everything.
My brothers and sisters were there
to meet me with a poster and flowers,
and my dear wife, Irina, was there.
It was such an unforgettable moment
when we saw and hugged each other.
Just as Jehovah promised
to provide a way out of trials,
so he did for me.
Indeed, he pushed all the barriers
aside and made it happen
so that my wife and I were able
to reunite on our wedding anniversary!
It brought us immeasurable joy.